CHAPTER VII.
Know ye not, brethren, for I speak to them that know the law, how that the law hath dominion
over a man as long as he liveth? For the woman which hath an husband is bound by the law
to her husband so long as he liveth. But if the husband be dead, she is loosed from the
law of her husband. So then if, while her husband liveth, she be married to another
man, she shall be called an adulteress. But if her husband be dead, she is free from that
law, so that she is no adulteress, though she be married to another man. Wherefore,
my brethren, ye also are become dead to the law by the body of Christ, that ye should
be married to another, even to him who is raised from the dead, that we should bring
forth fruit unto God. For when we were in the flesh, the motions of sins, which were
by the law, did work in our members to bring forth fruit unto death. But now we are delivered
from the law, that being dead wherein we were held, that we should serve in newness
of spirit, and not in the oldness of the latter. What shall we say then? Is the law sin? God
forbid! Nay, I had not known sin, but by the law. For I had not known lust, except the
law had said, Thou shalt not covet. But sin, taking occasion by the commandment, wrought
in me all manner of concupiscence, for without the law sin was dead. For I was alive without
the law once, but when the commandment came, sin revived, and I died. And the commandment,
which was ordained to life, I found to be unto death. For sin, taking occasion by the
commandment, deceived me, and by it slew me. Wherefore, the law is holy, and the commandment
holy, and just, and good. Was then that which is good made death unto me? God forbid! But
sin, that it might appear sin, working death in me by that which is good, that sin by the
commandment might become exceeding sinful. For we know that the law is spiritual, but
I am carnal, sold under sin. For that which I do, I allow not. For what I would, that
do I not. But what I hate, that do I. If then I do that which I would not, I consent unto
the law that it is good. Now then, it is no more I that do it, but sin that dwelleth in
me. For I know that in me, that is, in my flesh, dwelleth no good thing. For to will
is present with me, but how to perform that which is good I find not. For the good that
I would, I do not. But the evil which I would not, that I do. Now if I do that, I would
not. It is no more I that do it, but sin that dwelleth in me. I find then a law, that, when
I would do good, evil is present with me. For I delight in the law of God after the
inward man. But I see another law in my members, warring against the law of my mind, and bringing
me into captivity to the law of sin which is in my members. O wretched man that I am,
who shall deliver me from the body of this death? I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord. So
then with the mind I myself serve the law of God, but with the flesh the law of sin.
8. There is therefore now no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, who walk not
after the flesh, but after the Spirit. For the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus hath made
me free from the law of sin and death. For what the law could not do, in that it was weak through
the flesh, God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin, condemned sin in the
flesh, that the righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh,
but after the Spirit. For they that are after the flesh do mind the things of the flesh,
but they that are after the Spirit the things of the Spirit. For to be carnally minded is death,
but to be spiritually minded is life and peace. Because the carnal mind is enmity against God,
for it is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be. So then they that are in the flesh
cannot please God. But ye are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit, if so be that the Spirit of
God dwell in you. Now if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his. And if Christ
be in you, the body is dead because of sin, but the Spirit is life because of righteousness. But
if the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, he that raised up Christ
from the dead shall also quicken your mortal bodies by his Spirit that dwelleth in you.
Therefore, brethren, we are debtors, not to the flesh, to live after the flesh. For if ye
live after the flesh ye shall die, but if ye through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the
body ye shall live. For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of God. For ye
have not received the Spirit of bondage again to fear, but ye have received the Spirit of
adoption whereby we cry Abba Father. The Spirit itself beareth witness with our Spirit that we
are the children of God. And if children, then heirs, heirs of God and joint heirs with Christ,
if so be that we suffer with him, that we may be also glorified together. For I reckon that
present time are not worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us. For the
earnest expectation of the creature waiteth for the manifestation of the sons of God. For the
creature was made subject to vanity not willingly, but by reason of him who hath subjected the same
in hope, because the creature itself also shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption into
the glorious liberty of the children of God. For we know that the whole creation groaneth
and travaileth in pain together until now. And not only they, but ourselves also, which have the
firstfruits of the Spirit, even we ourselves groan within ourselves waiting for the adoption,
to wit, the redemption of our body. For we are saved by hope, but hope that is seen is not hope.
For what a man seeth, why doth he yet hope for? But if we hope for that we see not,
then do we with patience wait for it. Likewise the Spirit also helpeth our infirmities,
for we know not what we should pray for as we ought, but the Spirit itself maketh intercession
for us with groanings which cannot be uttered. And he that searcheth the hearts knoweth what is
mind of the Spirit, because he maketh intercession for the saints according to the will of God.
And we know that all things work together for good to them that love God, to them who are the
called according to his purpose. For whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate to be
conformed to the image of his Son, that he might be the firstborn among many brethren.
Moreover, whom he did predestinate, them he also called, and whom he called,
them he also justified, and whom he justified, them he also glorified.
What shall we then say to these things? If God be for us, who can be against us?
He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all,
how shall he not with him also freely give us all things?
Who shall lay anything to the charge of God's elect? It is God that justifieth.
Who is he that condemneth? It is Christ that died,
yea rather, that is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God,
who also maketh intercession for us.
Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Shall tribulation, or distress,
or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? As it is written,
For thy sake we are killed all the day long, we are accounted as sheep for the slaughter.
Nay, in all these things we are more than conquerors through him that loved us.
For I am persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities,
nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth,
nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God,
which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. End of chapter 8